URL: https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/starting-new-job/new-job-guide

How To Succeed in Your New Job: First Week, 30 and 90 Days
Written by

Updated December 16, 2025
Video: New Remote Job Tips: How to Set Yourself Up for Success in the First Month
Sinead will offer some helpful tips on succeeding in the first month of your remote job, from making introductions to setting up effective communication with your team
​​Congratulations on your new job! You’ve put in the hard work it takes to get to this point and that deserves a celebration.There’s a lot of uncertainty that comes with a new job. You’ll encounter new people, a new environment and a new set of responsibilities. To set you up for success, we’ve put together these tips to guide you through your first milestones.
Your personal AI career coach is on the app
Find and apply to jobs 7x faster with Career Scout, only available on the app
Source: Indeed Data, US, based on median, compared to job seekers who use mobile app
The first week of a new job
Success during week one is about balance. You want to make a great first impression, but you shouldn’t put too much pressure on yourself to get everything right. The goal is to learn about your new workplace and feel out your place in that ecosystem.In the first week:
1. Introduce yourself frequently
Studies have shown that anxiety in new situations can come in part from not feeling confident in how to introduce ourselves. It’s a natural feeling—when you’re new, you don’t necessarily want to call attention to yourself. But in the first days of a new job, you want your enthusiasm to shine through. So, find the timing that feels right and give a quick, energetic introduction to the people you don’t know yet.If meeting new people is particularly important to you, you can enlist the help of others. Mention to your manager that introducing yourself is a priority for you and ask for a list of people you should get to know. In meetings, you could ask the organizer to give you some time at the beginning or end to introduce yourself.Here are some ways to ease into your introductions:

    Prepare ahead of time. Prepare your opening lines ahead of time so you have a script at the ready when you encounter a new face.
    Pay attention to your surroundings and other people. Don’t interrupt a meeting to introduce yourself or speak too loudly in communal spaces. As you’re introducing yourself, take note of how the other person is reacting. If they seem distracted, keep it short. If they seem receptive, you may want to get to know this person better. You can make a great first impression by making someone else feel heard.
    Do your best to remember names. You can do this by saying the person’s name back to them and writing down a quick note about them when you part. Don’t get overwhelmed by needing to remember everyone’s name, though. If you forget someone’s name, honesty is the best policy: “I’m sorry, I’ve been taking in a lot of new information over the last few days. Could you remind me of your name?”

Related: Become a Networking Expert in 7 Steps
Video: New Job Nerves? Learn How to Make a Good First Impression!
To help you make a great first impression, we have 4 DO's and DON'Ts when starting a new job. Being prepared can help reduce stress and anxiety from a new job.
2. Ask well-timed questions
As a new employee, you are likely to do your job better if you know what to do. By asking your leaders and peers for new information, you’ll get up to speed quickly. But in your first week, you want to find the right time to ask questions. Here are some guidelines for how and when to ask:

    Think about what you want to know. In some cases, you may need permission, while at other times you may need advice or validation. If you get specific, you’ll be better able to ask and less likely to waste time.
    Prioritize the information you need. For example, if you can’t get your computer or access badge to work, that’s something you need help with immediately. If you’re not clear on the quarterly goals for your team, you can probably wait to talk with your manager about that over the coming weeks.
    Write down your questions so you don’t forget. You can raise these questions during a one-on-one meeting with your manager. You should learn your manager’s preferences: Do they want to be asked questions via email or in person? If you have a lot of questions for one person or group, consider setting up a meeting rather than stopping by their desk or office. In the meeting invite, you can list out the questions you have. This gives them time to prepare responses.

Video: First Impressions: Ask Informed Questions
In this video, Jenn, an Indeed Career Coach, explains how to prepare for your first day, and shares why you should ask informed questions.
3. Seek out a friend
Once you’ve made some introductions and have a sense of who you’ll be working with, ask a new colleague to lunch or coffee. It could be the person sitting next to you or another newcomer who started at the same time. Developing a trusted relationship will make you feel more comfortable as you’re getting to know this new workplace. In fact, research has shown that having social ties at work can make us more productive.During this first week, you may not find your best friend or develop a deep relationship with anyone. But seeking out someone you can relate to even in the short term will provide some needed stability.Related: 12 Signs You Need a New Job
4. Learn how to navigate and enjoy your new workplace
If you’re working in an office, locate the restrooms, the coffee and water, the stairs and elevators, where you can eat lunch and take breaks, and seek out any other amenities this workplace offers. If you haven’t been given a tour, consider asking a colleague for one.In this first week, you may also want to experiment with your commute or daily schedule, such as finding the right times to leave home and testing different routes or transportation methods. Identifying and establishing the routines early on will give you peace of mind.
5. Add value
Most likely, your job was open and you were hired because there is a lot of work to be done. In your first week, your main priority should be to soak up information but consider challenging yourself to add value in ways big or small. Here are some ideas of where to start:

    Ask your manager what their biggest pain point is. Once you know the answer, spend your first week thinking about how to lessen that burden. Don’t force it or step on anyone’s toes, but if there’s something you can do, do it.
    Think back to your interviews. Was there a specific need that came up? Consider writing up a short proposal for how you would take on that challenge.

Related: 55 Icebreaker Questions To Use When Meeting New People
Related jobs on Indeed
Part-time jobs
Full-time jobs
Remote jobs
Urgently hiring jobs
View more jobs on Indeed
The first month of a new job
After the exciting initial days on the job, it’s time to settle into your role. The goal in this first month is to learn how you can apply your skill set to the challenges and opportunities facing this organization.In the first month:
1. Get to know your team better
It’s important to continue making new connections and allowing others to know you, too. By simply being around your new team and attentively observing how everyone works and collaborates, you’ll gain valuable insights into the company and group culture.
2. Get organized and set good habits
This job is a fresh start and a good opportunity to shed old routines. Take these first weeks to decide how you want to organize your calendar and to-do lists, how you’ll manage your time and the skills or practices you want to develop.
3. Define success with your manager
During the first few weeks, you and your manager should take the time to clarify your mutual expectations. This includes understanding how you will work together, how you will get the resources you need to do your job well and how your job performance will be assessed.Here are a few guidelines for these conversations:

    Come prepared and use time effectively. When you are seeking guidance or information, you should take on the work of driving that conversation.
    Put yourself in your manager’s position. If you find that your expectations don’t align, try to see it from their perspective and find areas of overlap or compromise.
    Identify early wins. There are probably a lot of things on your plate. As you learn more about what your manager values, prioritize the tasks that support their goals as well.

4. Be humble and open-minded
When we are humble, we are acknowledging that we cannot go it alone. Take the time to thank the people who are showing you the ropes, don’t take credit for work you haven’t done and listen more than you speak. You’ve never done this exact job in this exact setting, so no matter how much experience you have behind you, keep an open mind.
